---
layout: post
title: "People Love Waiting in Line"
description: ""
tags: [software design]
---
*It's true!*

I've seen too much evidence to support it. I am always amazed when boarding for a flight, how people just start lining up at least 10 minutes before the boarding process even though they have numbers determining when they will actually go in. My friend [Jeff](http://twitter.com/#!/jjarmoc) pointed out to me on twitter that they want to be able to put their stuff in overhead, which makes sense. On my return flight, it was the same thing..people lining up..but that aircraft didn't even have the proper overhead capacity for the usual carry-on bag. I can only come to the conclusion that they were just conditioned to do that. A couple years back, a group of friends and I went to [PAX](http://prime.paxsite.com/) in Seattle. The rooms they held the panel discussions in were WAY too small for the audience so there were lines (some lasting hours) to get in to some of them. It got to the point where there was no clear start point to some of them. One had a particularly longer line than the others. Out of curiousity I asked someone what they were waiting for, *"I don't know."* was his response. I suppose he's just happy to be waiting in line for anything! I was working with a client trying to debug some performance issues with a search form. She stated it was taking too long, but she starting the conversation by saying she understood that it would take a long time because it has to do a lot of searching and filtering. Now, in reality it was just a pretty vanilla SQL query with a single WHERE clause running against a table with a couple hundred rows. The problem ended up being due to other network issues, but it was then that I realized that how you present the wait is as important as the wait itself.  I suppose it comes down to how much you value your time versus what you will be getting in return. If people don't value their time at all they don't care how long they wait, or they feel the end result is so valuable they don't mind sacrificing their time. There is also the X-factor of the actual atmosphere and experience of the waiting itself, the folks at Disney are masters of this.

I often surprise myself in how often my tolerance for waiting varies. If someone sends me a YouTube link, and it loads slow or theres an ad, usually I just close it. I feel i need to have it proved to me that it is worth my time (even though we are only talking about a 30 second wait!) However, if i'm finishing up an online purchase and the final confirmation takes longer than usual, I don't sweat it. Part of the reason for that is i feel a little bit of ownership for the wait, after all, it is a result of the time ive already spent filling out the order forms. Another reason is that I understand there are many more operations going on at once that I am waiting for, but that just comes from my background of knowing the processes involved.

I find it fascinating that that progress bars are being replaced with the spinning activity wheel, or the barbershop pole. I feel like it's the developer trying to strike a bargain with the user. *"OK, you're going to have to wait, NO, I don't know when it's done, YES, I assure you, I'm doing something"*

Most developers I know have an obsession with making things as fast as possible. It's understandable considering that is the purpose of technology; save time and reduce workload. Some pauses are just unavoidable, but are perfectly fine if managed properly.