---
layout: post
title: "SOLID Principles of Object-Oriented Design (Part 2 of 6)"
description: ""
category: 
tags: [programming, SOLID, software design]
---
Previously
----------
[Part 1](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/05/23/SOLID-Intro-1-of-6/)

Recap
-----
The last code example was followed by a few questions:

* Can this code be tested, if so, how?
* If you need to change any of the steps in this process, how easy is it? what will be affected by these changes?
* How can you seperate the configuration from the application logic?

The questions get to the heart of the problem meant to be solved with object-oriented methodologies. The problem is procedural code makes it very difficult to modify one aspect without impacting everything else. The ultimate goal is have code with parts that don't have knowledge of the internal workings of each other (aka: classes that are loosely coupled). Once you have that you can test the individual parts, rearange execution order, and dynamically initialize state.

The Single Responsibility Principle
-----
The SRP is the epitome of easy to describe, but hardest to follow, it simply states
> **A class should have only one reason to change.**
It's a very subtle, but important, difference between "should only do one thing" and "should only have one reason to change".  It will lead to problems if you have a class that starts out as a text reader and ends up as some sort of computation class with text reading capabilities.  

From a 10,000 foot view, most software boils down to READ IN DATA -> PROCESS DATA -> DISPLAY DATA.  If you have classes (I would also make the case that this principle would apply to functions too as well) that are doing more than one of these, you are probably going to run into issues as your program grows.  

Which brings us back to the example code.

The Example
-----
Given the above explanation, it should be clear how how the example code violates the Single Responsibility Principle.  There is only one function that does input, processing, and output.  Our first step is to try to break what's going on into 'chunks' which will become the objects.  Currently the flow of the application is this 

* Retrieve data from a service
* Process the data through our simple algorithm
* e-mail the data out.

These are obvious starting points, so let's start chipping off the code to create some objects. A good first step is to extract functionality into seperate methods. Take for example the web request in the middle of the loop:

	var response = new HttpClient()
		.GetAsync("http://www.null.com/" + beginDate.ToShortDateString()).Result;

	int price = int.Parse(response.Content.ReadAsStringAsync().Result);

Extracting this to a method will look like this:

	public int GetPriceForDate(string uri, DateTime date)
	{
		var response = new HttpClient()
			.GetAsync(uri + date.ToShortDateString()).Result;

		return int.Parse(response.Content.ReadAsStringAsync().Result);
	}

This gives us a little more human-readability, but let's go a bit further and encapsulate this functionality into an object using the [Command](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_pattern) pattern:

    public class PriceService
    {
        public string Uri { get; set; }

        public PriceService(string uri)
        {
            Uri = uri;
        }

        public int GetPriceForDate(DateTime date)
        {
            var response = new HttpClient().GetAsync(Uri + date.ToShortDateString()).Result;

            return int.Parse(response.Content.ReadAsStringAsync().Result);
        }
    }

This class has the single responsibility of calling the price service. By encasulating the configuration we can seperate that from the program logic.  It is now possible to use this class in other applications.  Also, you can easily write tests for it.

To use this object in our original program we can now have:

	var priceService = new PriceService("http://www.null.com");

and to call the service:

	int result = priceService.GetPriceForDate(beginDate);

You can do the same thing with the Email sending component, You can look at my repo [here](http://github.com/tcshao/SOLID-RefactoringExample/blob/master/src/SRP/Program.cs) to see my approach.

In the next post, the Open/Closed Principle.  This will help deal with the next wrench to be thrown into the works.  Let's say the people providing us data are now asking for too much money, so the business has decided all data will be read from text files instead.  How do we make that change with minimal impact to the overall application?



