---
layout: post
title: "SOLID Principles of Object-Oriented Design (Part 3 of 6)"
description: ""
category: 
tags: [programming, SOLID, software design]
---
Previously
----------
* [Part 1](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/05/23/SOLID-Intro-1-of-6/)
* [Part 2](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/05/29/SOLID-SRP-2-of-6/)

Recap
-----
So, our initial [example](http://github.com/tcshao/SOLID-RefactoringExample/blob/master/src/Initial/Program.cs) is starting to look a little more object-oriented in it's current [state](http://github.com/tcshao/SOLID-RefactoringExample/blob/master/src/SRP/Program.cs). On the surface, this code looks more complex (or, at the very least, there is more of it).  There is a little bit more to wrap your head around, but the tradeoff is that it is much more resilient to change.  

The new requirement added to our problem was to replace the call to a web service with reading from a text file.  We will use the Open/Closed Principle to guide us how to extend this functionality

The Open/Closed Principle
-----
The definition is:
> Classes should be open for extension, but closed for modification
If we want to extend a class, we want to ensure that all of the functionality of the parent class is there, and still behaves the same.  The traditional way to do this is through inheritance.  Applying this to our current problem, it would look like this:

    public abstract class PriceService
    {
        public abstract int GetPriceForDate(DateTime date);
    }

    public class PriceServiceWeb : PriceService
    {
    	public override int GetPriceForDate(DateTime date)
    	{
    		// implementation here
    	}
    }

    public class PriceServiceFile : PriceService
    {
    	public override int GetPriceForDate(DateTime date)
    	{
    		// implementation here
    	}
    }

This follows the Open Closed Principle, but it is also possible to make this a little more seperated by using interfaces.  Using interfaces, we constrain the class to certain behaviors (a contract, if you will).  This way, we can switch out the behaviors more easily during run-time. (Details on this will be in the next post)  Also, in C#, you can not inherit from multiple classes, but you can use multiple interfaces.  Bringing in interfaces now also plays a big part in the remaining principles.  A couple pieces of advice from the Gang of Four [Book](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_Patterns)

* Program to an 'interface' not an 'implementation'
* Favor 'object composition' over 'class inheritance'

Here's the above with using an Interface

    public interface IPriceService
    {
        int GetPriceForDate(DateTime date);
    }

	public class PriceServiceWeb : IPriceService
	{
		public int GetPriceForDate(DateTime date)
		{
			// implementation here
		}
	}

	public class PriceServiceFile : IPriceService
	{
		public int GetPriceForDate(DateTime date)
		{
			// implementation here
		}
	}

When you declare the object, you can use the Interface type so you can have the compiler assist you in preventing any type errors:

	IPriceService priceService = new PriceServiceWeb("http://www.null.com");

Full Code [here](https://github.com/tcshao/SOLID-RefactoringExample/blob/master/src/OCP/Program.cs)

By combining the SRP and the OCP we have seperate independent units we can compose at runtime.  As we move on to the next principle, we will explore the possibilities of allowing the application to find the correct concrete implementation on it's own.  Now, I feel the need to watch Robocop again.