---
layout: post
title: "SOLID Principles of Object-Oriented Design (Part 4 of 6)"
description: ""
category: 
tags: [programming, SOLID, software design]
---
Previously
----------
* [Part 1](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/05/23/SOLID-Intro-1-of-6/)
* [Part 2](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/05/29/SOLID-SRP-2-of-6/)
* [Part 3](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/06/01/SOLID-OCP-3-of-6/)

Recap
-----
The modest little example has evolved into something (more) object-oriented now.  It's current state can be viewed [here](http://github.com/tcshao/SOLID-RefactoringExample/blob/master/src/OCP/Program.cs).  I noted in the last post that it is becoming increasingly complex (in terms of lines of code).  A good question at this point is, why bother? For one-off applications, or demoware, you probably won't.  However if you app is going to be used by actual people, and in production for more than a week, you will reap the benefits of modular design in time.  Over the next two posts, I will be illustrating some cool benefits you get at a fairly low cost with loosely coupled code. Ok, back to it.

Liskov Substitution Principle
-----
The definition of this one
> objects in a program should be replaceable with instances of their subtypes without altering the correctness of that program
This one is a little abstract (pun intended).  I feel it's better to define by showing what not to do, rather than what to do. 

Let's say we have this class. ***("we have this class!")***

    public class Product
    {
        public string Name { get; set; }
        public decimal UnitCost { get; set; }
        public float Weight { get; set; }

        // assume some calculations are here
    }

This class is used as a model of Product information, as well as to do some shipping/billing calculations.  This company is in the business of selling books. They have recently opened up their business to electronic distribution.  Of course, they want to keep their existing systems in place and write as little new code as possible. What? It has to be done tomorrow?! Fine, I can inherit!

    public class ElectronicProduct : Product
    {
        public int FileSize { get; set; }
    }

I will now get all my regular functionality from the Product class into this.  So everything seems to work fine, I'm still using Product everywhere.  I recast the object, and put in some info for the FileSize attribute where appropriate.  This is all well and good until we run into some logic that takes the "Weight" property into consideration.  For example, a shipping cost calculator will figure the weight in. What? It has to be done today now? OK, fine it has no weight, we can just put this into that ElectronicProduct class to not throw off any of our existing calculations:

    public class ElectronicProduct : Product
    {
        new public float Weight { get { return 0; }}

        // rest of class
    }

This may address all the existing problems, but it raises a lot of red flags.  Theres also the semantic issue.  If you are saying a type of product has no weight anymore, than weight is not a defining characteristic of every product.   Therefore, it does not belong in the base class anymore.  The alternative would be to have a new abstract class product that the others would inherit from:

    public abstract class Product
    {
        public string Name { get; set; }
    }

    public class MaterialProduct : Product
    {
        // implementation
    }

    public class ElectronicProduct : Product
    {
        // implementation
    }
The Example
-----
What I will illustrate now isn't directly related to LSP, but more the power of loosely-coupled, highly-cohesive objects.  The last few sections we have been working with a class that gets prices from different sources. You can see where we left it [here](https://github.com/tcshao/SOLID-RefactoringExample/blob/master/src/OCP/Program.cs).  This allows us to have some options when composing/assembling our objects.

The [Factory Pattern](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory_method_pattern) is one of the more ubiquitous ones in the wild. It encapsulates the plumbing around object creation.  it usually looks something like this:

        public static class HistoryObjectFactory
        {
            public static IHistoryObject GetHistoryObject(DateTime time)
            {
                if (time < DateTime.Now)
                    return new PastObject();
                else
                    return new FutureObject();

                // All object types returned from this function must implement IHistoryObject!!
            }
        }

that concept applied to our PriceService objects:

    public static class PriceServiceFactory
    {
        public static IPriceService GetPriceService(string targetInfo)
        {
            // pattern specifying a text file
            var textFilePattern = @"\.txt\z";
            // the following RegEx will accept non-ip addresses (ex 999.99.99.9)
            // for display purposes only, those responsible have been sacked
            var ipAddressPattern = @"\b\d{1,3}\.\d{1,3}\.\d{1,3}\.\d{1,3}\b";

            if(Regex.IsMatch(targetInfo, textFilePattern))
            {
                return new PriceServiceFile(targetInfo);
            }
            
            if(Regex.IsMatch(targetInfo, ipAddressPattern))
            {
                return new PriceServiceWeb(targetInfo);
            }

            return null;
        }
    }

and can be called like so:

    var priceService = PriceServiceFactory.GetPriceService("file.txt");

***Important Note:*** We can now add more objects implementing the PriceService interface.  The only thing we will need to modify the factory object from here on out.  Our main core app can remain untouched.

This factory will serve up objects based upon the string given to it.  It switches from being a web request to reading from a flat file.  This even has some prescriptive guidance on how to use it.  If a txt file is passed it assumes you wanted the text reader. Doing things this way is sometimes referred to as ***Convention over Configuration***.  Which tries to eschew making complex decisions by doing what is [least astonishing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment).

Up Next, I and unit tests!!