---
layout: post
title: "SOLID Principles of Object-Oriented Design (Part 5 of 6)"
description: ""
category: 
tags: [programming, SOLID, software design]
---
Previously
----------
* [Part 1](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/05/23/SOLID-Intro-1-of-6/)
* [Part 2](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/05/29/SOLID-SRP-2-of-6/)
* [Part 3](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/06/01/SOLID-OCP-3-of-6/)
* [Part 4](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/06/05/SOLID-LSP-4-of-6/)

Recap
-----
I am just about at the end of this exercise here.  I have made some cosmetic changes to make the project a little easier to navigate.  You can see it [here](http://github.com/tcshao/SOLID-RefactoringExample/tree/master/src/ISP).  I won't be making very many changes to the project from here.  Just using the work to point out examples.  This doesn't mean what we have is refactored optimally, as we can do a similiar thing to the EmailService functionality, but I will leave that up to the reader if they'd like to do that work.  Here is the main code up to now:

        static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            var priceService = PriceService.GetPriceService(args[0]);
            var emailService = new EmailService(args[1]);

            var total = GetTotalPrices(priceService, days: 7);
            var forecastedPrice = GetForecastedPrice(total, days: 7);

            emailService.Send(
                "from@null.com", 
                "to@null.com",
                "The forecasted price is " + forecastedPrice.ToString());
        }

        public static decimal GetTotalPrices(IPriceService service, int days)
        {
            // implementation has been removed to protect the innocent
        }

        public static decimal GetForecastedPrice(decimal totalPrices, int days)
        {
            return totalPrices / days;
        }
    }

Interface Segregation Principle
-----
I usually think of this one in concert with the [previous principle](http://autoincomplete.com/2013/06/05/SOLID-LSP-4-of-6/) in that it's a constraint you put on the composition of your objects. ISP can be worded like this:
> Favor multiple behavior-specific interfaces instead of one general purpose one for your object.
That's quite a mouthful.  I think this is one of those "when you see it, you know" type of things. 

I will show this using the ubiquitous Person object.  Activities this person object will be involved in is computing a taxbracket, persisting its information to a database, and the ability to display its contents to the user. So, let's say we make something like this

    interface IPerson
    {
        decimal GetTax();
        void PersistToDb(Connection conn);
        void Display();
    }

    class Person : IPerson
    {
        // class info
    }

That is the illustration of the general purpose Interface. Here is it split up by behavior:

    interface ITaxable
    {
        decimal GetTax();
    }

    interface IPersistable
    {
        void Persist();
    }

    interface IDisplayable
    {
        void Display();
    }

    class Person : ITaxable, IPersistable, IDisplayable
    {
        // class info
    }

This is all in the spirit of the other (and most) important principle of software : Do Not Repeat Yourself (DRY).  Chances are, in an application like this theres other other objects in your app that need to be printed.  and you already have an interface definition for that!  It will make further code reuse easier.  Splitting it up by behavior will make maintenece easier.  As its unlikely if theres an issue printing, it will involve the financial calculation logic.  Multiple small components is always better than one big one, as you'll see as we move into testing.

Unit Testing
-----
This is a huge subject, and goes beyond the scope of this series, but I want to show some tests for this project to show what is possible now that we have refactored the code.  We can now **PROVE** that the code works.  

Aside: I feel the urge to mention Test-Driven Development (TDD) here.  I strongly suggest being familiar with TDD.  A lot of these OOD principles weren't apparent to me until i forced myself to do a couple TDD projects.  I would recommend [this](http://www.amazon.com/Professional-Test-Driven-Development-Applications/dp/047064320X/) great book on using TDD if you are a C# developer.  My biggest "problem" with TDD is being that software can get very successful and thus be around for years, you can't always use TDD. The norm IS that there is already code and constraints on you.  Part of the motivation for this series was to start with a bit of existing code, because that's more real-world.  That being said, whenever at looking at any code, old or not, asking yourself 'how can I test this?' is NEVER a bad place to start.

Here's a test we can write now.  We have a static function, great, we can just call it from one of our tests (i'm using [xUnit](http://xunit.codeplex.com/))

        [Fact]
        public void forecasted_price_should_be_the_average()
        {
            var expected = 25;
            var actual = Program.GetForecastedPrice(125, 5);

            Assert.Equal(expected, actual);
        }

Pretty straightforward, no?

Let's consider how we would write a test for our other static function:

        public static decimal GetTotalPrices(IPriceService service, int days)
        {
            var beginDate = DateTime.Now.Subtract(new TimeSpan(days, 0, 0, 0));
            decimal total = 0;

            // get a total of the prices from the last 7 days
            while (beginDate.Date < DateTime.Now.Date)
            {
                int price = service.GetPriceForDate(beginDate);

                total += price;
                beginDate = beginDate.Add(new TimeSpan(1, 0, 0, 0));
            }

            return total;
        }

Here's where the words "Unit Test" are important.  we are only testing the code in this function, not code outside of it.  If you remember our previous examples, the "IPriceService" can refer to two COMPLETELY DIFFERENT implementations.  So for purposes of this unit we don't care which implementation it's using.  In fact, this also means the values that come out of the service are completely arbitrary. We just want to prove it got x days of data and it added it up properly.  So we will test just this functionality here, and the actual data acquision in a later test .

This is where mock objects come into play.  A mock object is an object that we define how it will respond to requests.  Being that we were good OO citizens when we designed this app, we can now invert the application on itself and throw in a mock object to implement the IPriceService interface.  I will be using [Moq](https://code.google.com/p/moq/) as the mock object generator.  Here's the test:

        [Fact]
        public void the_gettotalprices_function_should_return_the_total_prices_for_a_number_of_days()
        {
            var mockPriceService = new Mock<IPriceService>();
            mockPriceService.Setup(service => service.GetPriceForDate(It.IsAny<DateTime>())).Returns(25);

            var expected = 125;
            var actual = Program.GetTotalPrices(mockPriceService.Object, 5);

            Assert.Equal(expected, actual);
        }

The "Setup" call has the most going on here, and may look a little strange if you're not familiar with the C# lambda syntax.  The Setup method excepts a function where you define what calls the mock object will respond to.  In english, that line says "Whenever GetPriceForDate is called for this object, and any date is passed to it, return the value 25".  The mockPriceService.Object represents the concrete implementation of "IPriceService" with all the setup methods hanging off of it.  We are asking for 5 days, and we know it will return 25 for each of those days, we can assert that the total will be 125.

Next we will discuss the Dependency Inversion Principle, and the shocking revelation that we have actually been talking about that this whole time.

**"What a Twist!"**